Romeo and Juliet
William Shakespeare


Romeo and Juliet is the world's most famous drama of tragic young love.

Defying the feud which divides their families, Romeo and Juliet enjoy the fleeting rapture of courtship, marriage and sexual fulfillment; but a combination of old animosities and new coincidences brings them to suicidal deaths.

This play offers a rich mixture of romantic lyricism, bawdy comedy, intimate harmony and sudden violence. Long successful in the theater, it has also generated numerous operas, ballets and films; and these have helped to make Romeo and Juliet perennially topical.
aaaaaaa




ROMEO AND JULIET by WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE





PERSONS REPRESENTED


Escalus, Prince of Verona.

Paris, a young Nobleman, Kinsman to the Prince.

Montague, Heads of two Houses at variance with each other.

Capulet, an Old Man, Uncle to Capulet.

Romeo, Son to Montague.

Mercutio, Kinsman to the Prince and Friend to Romeo.

Benvolio, Nephew to Montague and Friend to Romeo.

Tybalt, Nephew to Lady Capulet.

Friar Lawrence, a Franciscan.

Friar John, of the same Order.

Balthasar, Servant to Romeo.

Sampson, Servant to Capulet.

Gregory, Servant to Capulet.

Peter, Servant to Juliet's Nurse.

Abraham, Servant to Montague.

An Apothecary.

Three Musicians.

Chorus.

Page to Paris; another Page.

An Officer.

Lady Montague, Wife to Montague.

Lady Capulet, Wife to Capulet.

Juliet, Daughter to Capulet.

Nurse to Juliet.

Citizens of Verona; several Men and Women, relations to both houses; Maskers, Guards, Watchmen, and Attendants.




THE PROLOGUE



[Enter Chorus.]


Chor.

		Two households, both alike in dignity,
		In fair Verona, where we lay our scene,
		From ancient grudge break to new mutiny,
		Where civil blood makes civil hands unclean.
		From forth the fatal loins of these two foes
		A pair of star-cross'd lovers take their life;
		Whose misadventur'd piteous overthrows
		Doth with their death bury their parents' strife.
		The fearful passage of their death-mark'd love,
		And the continuance of their parents' rage,
		Which but their children's end naught could remove,
		Is now the two hours' traffic of our stage;
		The which, if you with patient ears attend,
		What here shall miss, our toil shall strive to mend.




ACT I.





Scene I.



A public place.


[Enter Sampson and Gregory armed with swords and bucklers.]

Sampson. Gregory, o' my word, we'll not carry coals.

Gregory. No, for then we should be colliers.

Sampson. I mean, an we be in choler we'll draw.

Gregory. Ay, while you live, draw your neck out o' the collar.

Sampson. I strike quickly, being moved.

Gregory. But thou art not quickly moved to strike.

Sampson. A dog of the house of Montague moves me.

Gregory. To move is to stir; and to be valiant is to stand.

Therefore, if thou art moved, thou runn'st away.

Sampson. A dog of that house shall move me to stand.

I will take the wall of any man or maid of Montague's.

Gregory. That shows thee a weak slave; for the weakest goes to the wall.

Sampson. True; and therefore women, being the weaker vessels,

Are ever thrust to the wall. Therefore I will push

Montague's men from the wall and thrust his maids to the wall.

Gregory. The quarrel is between our masters and us their men.

Sampson. 'Tis all one, I will show myself a tyrant.

When I have fought with the men

I will be cruel with the maids,

I will cut off their heads.

Gregory. The heads of the maids?

Sampson. Ay, the heads of the maids, or their maidenheads;

Take it in what sense thou wilt.

Gregory. They must take it in sense that feel it.

Sampson. Me they shall feel while I am able to stand.

And 'tis known I am a pretty piece of flesh.

Gregory. 'Tis well thou art not fish; if thou hadst, thou

Hadst been poor-John. Draw thy tool; Here comes

Two of the house of Montagues.

Sampson. My naked weapon is out. quarrel! I will back thee.

Gregory. How! turn thy back and run?

Sampson. Fear me not.

Gregory. No, marry; I fear thee!

Sampson. Let us take the law of our sides; let them begin.

Gregory. I will frown as I pass by; and let them take it as they list.

Sampson. Nay, as they dare. I will bite my thumb at them;

Which is disgrace to them if they bear it.


[Enter Abraham and Balthasar.]

Abraham. Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?

Sampson. I do bite my thumb, sir.

Abraham. Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?

Sampson. Is the law of our side if I say ay?

Gregory. No.

Sampson. No, sir, I do not bite my thumb at you, sir; but I bite my thumb, sir.

Gregory. Do you quarrel, sir?

Abraham. Quarrel, sir! no, sir.

Sampson. But if you do, sir, am for you. I serve as good a man as you.

Abraham. No better.

Sampson. Well, sir.

Gregory. Say better; here comes one of my master's kinsmen.

Sampson. Yes, better, sir.

Abraham. You lie.

Sampson. Draw, if you be men. Gregory, remember thy swashing blow.


[They fight.]


[Enter Benvolio.]

Benvolio. Part, fools! put up your swords; you know not what you do.


[Beats down their swords.]


[Enter Tybalt.]

Tybalt. What, art thou drawn among these heartless hinds?

Turn thee Benvolio, look upon thy death.

Benvolio. I do but keep the peace. Put up thy sword,

Or manage it to part these men with me.

Tybalt. What, drawn, and talk of peace! I hate the word

As I hate hell, all Montagues, and thee.

Have at thee, coward!


[They fight.]


[Enter several of both Houses, who join the fray; then enter Citizens with clubs.]

1 Citizen. Clubs, bills, and partisans! strike! beat them down!

Down with the Capulets! Down with the Montagues!


[Enter Capulet in his gown, and Lady Capulet.]

Capulet. What noise is this? Give me my long sword, ho!

Lady Capulet. A crutch, a crutch! Why call you for a sword?

Capulet. My sword, I say! Old Montague is come,

And flourishes his blade in spite of me.


[Enter Montague and his Lady Montague.]

Montague. Thou villain Capulet! Hold me not, let me go.

Lady Montague. Thou shalt not stir one foot to seek a foe.


[Enter Prince, with Attendants.]

		Prince. Rebellious subjects, enemies to peace,
		Profaners of this neighbour-stained steel,
		Will they not hear? What, ho! you men, you beasts,
		That quench the fire of your pernicious rage
		With purple fountains issuing from your veins;
		On pain of torture, from those bloody hands
		Throw your mistemper'd weapons to the ground
		And hear the sentence of your moved Prince.
		Three civil brawls, bred of an airy word,
		By thee, old Capulet, and Montague,
		Have thrice disturb'd the quiet of our streets;
		And made Verona's ancient citizens
		Cast by their grave beseeming ornaments,
		To wield old partisans, in hands as old,
		Canker'd with peace, to part your canker'd hate.
		If ever you disturb our streets again,
		Your lives shall pay the forfeit of the peace.
		For this time, all the rest depart away.
		You, Capulet, shall go along with me;
		And, Montague, come you this afternoon,
		To know our farther pleasure in this case,
		To old Free-town, our common judgment-place.
		Once more, on pain of death, all men depart.


[Exeunt Prince and Attendants; Capulet, Lady Capulet, Tybalt, Citizens, and Servants.]

		Montague. Who set this ancient quarrel new abroach?
		Speak, nephew, were you by when it began?

		Benvolio. Here were the servants of your adversary
		And yours, close fighting ere I did approach.
		I drew to part them in the instant came
		The fiery Tybalt, with his sword prepar'd;
		Which, as he breath'd defiance to my ears,
		He swung about his head, and cut the winds,
		Who, nothing hurt withal, hiss'd him in scorn.
		While we were interchanging thrusts and blows,
		Came more and more, and fought on part and part,
		Till the prince came, who parted either part.

		Lady Montague. O, where is Romeo? Saw you him to-day?
		Right glad I am he was not at this fray.

		Benvolio. Madam, an hour before the worshipp'd sun
		Peer'd forth the golden window of the east,
		A troubled mind drave me to walk abroad;
		Where, underneath the grove of sycamore
		That westward rooteth from the city's side,
		So early walking did I see your son.
		Towards him I made; but he was ware of me,
		And stole into the covert of the wood.
		I, measuring his affections by my own,
		That most are busied when they're most alone,
		Pursu'd my humour, not pursuing his,
		And gladly shunn'd who gladly fled from me.

		Montague. Many a morning hath he there been seen,
		With tears augmenting the fresh morning's dew,
		Adding to clouds more clouds with his deep sighs.
		But all so soon as the all-cheering sun
		Should in the farthest east begin to draw
		The shady curtains from Aurora's bed,
		Away from light steals home my heavy son,
		And private in his chamber pens himself;
		Shuts up his windows, locks fair daylight out
		And makes himself an artificial night.
		Black and portentous must this humour prove,
		Unless good counsel may the cause remove.

Benvolio. My noble uncle, do you know the cause?

Montague. I neither know it nor can learn of him.

Benvolio. Have you importun'd him by any means?

		Montague. Both by myself and many other friends;
		But he, his own affections' counsellor,
		Is to himself, I will not say how true,
		But to himself so secret and so close,
		So far from sounding and discovery,
		As is the bud bit with an envious worm
		Ere he can spread his sweet leaves to the air,
		Or dedicate his beauty to the sun.
		Could we but learn from whence his sorrows grow,
		We would as willingly give cure as know.

Benvolio. See, where he comes. so please you step aside;

I'll know his grievance or be much denied.

Montague. I would thou wert so happy by thy stay

To hear true shrift. Come, madam, let's away


[Exeunt Montague and Lady.]


[Enter Romeo.]

Benvolio. Good morrow, cousin. Romeo. Is the day so young?

Benvolio. But new struck nine.

Romeo. Ay me! sad hours seem long.

Was that my father that went hence so fast?

Benvolio. It was. What sadness lengthens Romeo's hours?

Romeo. Not having that which, having, makes them short.

Benvolio. In love?

Romeo. Out,

Benvolio. Of love?

Romeo. Out of her favour where I am in love.

Benvolio. Alas, that love, so gentle in his view,

Should be so tyrannous and rough in proof!

		Romeo. Alas that love, whose view is muffled still,
		Should, without eyes, see pathways to his will!
		Where shall we dine? O,me! What fray was here?
		Yet tell me not, for I have heard it all.
		Here's much to do with hate, but more with love.
		Why, then, O brawling love! O loving hate!
		O anything, of nothing first create!
		O heavy lightness! serious vanity!
		Mis-shapen chaos of well-seeming forms!
		Feather of lead, bright smoke, cold fire, sick health!
		Still-waking sleep, that is not what it is!
		This love feel I, that feel no love in this.
		Dost thou not laugh?

Benvolio. No, coz, I rather weep.

Romeo. Good heart, at what?

Benvolio. At thy good heart's oppression.

		Romeo. Why, such is love's transgression.
		Griefs of mine own lie heavy in my breast;
		Which thou wilt propagate, to have it prest
		With more of thine: this love that thou hast shown
		Doth add more grief to too much of mine own.
		Love is a smoke rais'd with the fume of sighs;
		Being purg'd, a fire sparkling in lovers' eyes;
		Being vex'd, a sea nourish'd with lovers' tears.
		What is it else? a madness most discreet,
		A choking gall, and a preserving sweet.
		Farewell, my coz.


[Going.]

Benvolio. Soft! I will go along.

An if you leave me so, you do me wrong.

Romeo. Tut! I have lost myself; I am not here.

This is not Romeo, he's some other where.

Benvolio. Tell me in sadness who is that you love?

Romeo. What, shall I groan and tell thee?

Benvolio. Groan! why, no;

But sadly tell me who.

Romeo. Bid a sick man in sadness make his will,

Ah, word ill urg'd to one that is so ill!

In sadness, cousin, I do love a woman.

Benvolio. I aim'd so near when I suppos'd you lov'd.

Romeo. A right good markman! And she's fair I love.

Benvolio. A right fair mark, fair coz, is soonest hit.

		Romeo. Well, in that hit you miss: she'll not be hit
		With Cupid's arrow, she hath Dian's wit;
		And, in strong proof of chastity well arm'd.
		From love's weak childish bow she lives unharm'd.
		She will not stay the siege of loving terms
		Nor bide th' encounter of assailing eyes,
		Nor ope her lap to saint-seducing gold.
		O, she's rich in beauty; only poor
		That, when she dies, with beauty dies her store.

Benvolio. Then she hath sworn that she will still live chaste?

		Romeo. She hath, and in that sparing makes huge waste;
		For beauty, starv'd with her severity,
		Cuts beauty off from all posterity.
		She is too fair, too wise; wisely too fair,
		To merit bliss by making me despair.
		She hath forsworn to love; and in that vow
		Do I live dead that live to tell it now.

Benvolio. Be rul'd by me, forget to think of her.

Romeo. O, teach me how I should forget to think.

Benvolio. By giving liberty unto thine eyes;

Examine other beauties.

		Romeo. 'Tis the way
		To call hers, exquisite, in question more.
		These happy masks that kiss fair ladies' brows,
		Being black, puts us in mind they hide the fair;
		He that is strucken blind cannot forget
		The precious treasure of his eyesight lost.
		Show me a mistress that is passing fair,
		What doth her beauty serve but as a note
		Where I may read who pass'd that passing fair?
		Farewell: thou canst not teach me to forget.

Benvolio. I'll pay that doctrine, or else die in debt.


[Exeunt.]




Scene II.



A Street.


[Enter Capulet, Paris, and Servant.]

		Capulet. But Montague is bound as well as I,
		In penalty alike; and 'tis not hard, I think,
		For men so old as we to keep the peace.

		Paris.Of honourable reckoning are you both;
		And pity 'tis you liv'd at odds so long.
		But now, my lord, what say you to my suit?

		Capulet. But saying o'er what I have said before.
		My child is yet a stranger in the world,
		She hath not seen the change of fourteen years;
		Let two more summers wither in their pride
		Ere we may think her ripe to be a bride.

Paris. Younger than she are happy mothers made.

		Capulet. And too soon marr'd are those so early made.
		The earth hath swallowed all my hopes but she;
		She is the hopeful lady of my earth.
		But woo her, gentle Paris, get her heart,
		My will to her consent is but a part;
		An she agree, within her scope of choice
		Lies my consent and fair according voice.
		This night I hold an old accustom'd feast,
		Whereto I have invited many a guest,
		Such as I love; and you among the store,
		One more, most welcome, makes my number more.
		At my poor house look to behold this night
		Earth-treading stars that make dark heaven light.
		Such comfort as do lusty young men feel
		When well apparell'd April on the heel
		Of limping winter treads, even such delight
		Among fresh female buds shall you this night
		Inherit at my house; hear all, all see,
		And like her most whose merit most shall be.
		Which, among view of many, mine, being one,
		May stand in number, though in reckoning none.
		Come, go with me.



		Go, sirrah, trudge about
		Through fair Verona; find those persons out
		Whose names are written there,


[gives a paper]

		And to them say;
		My house and welcome on their pleasure stay.


[Exeunt Capulet and Paris].

		Servant. Find them out whose names are written here! It is
		Written that the shoemaker should meddle with his
		Yard and the tailor with his last, the fisher with
		His pencil, and the painter with his nets; but I am
		Sent to find those persons whose names are here
		Writ, and can never find what names the writing
		Person hath here writ. I must to the learned..in good time!


[Enter Benvolio and Romeo. ]

		Benvolio. Tut, man, one fire burns out another's burning,
		One pain is lessen'd by another's anguish;
		Turn giddy, and be holp by backward turning.
		One desperate grief cures with another's languish.
		Take thou some new infection to thy eye,
		And the rank poison of the old will die.

Romeo. Your plantain-leaf is excellent for that.

Benvolio. For what, I pray thee?

Romeo. For your broken shin.

Benvolio. Why, Romeo, art thou mad?

		Romeo. Not mad, but bound more than a madman is;
		Shut up in prison, kept without my food.
		Whipp'd and tormented and God-den, good fellow.

Servant. God gi' go-den. I pray, sir, can you read?

Romeo. Ay, mine own fortune in my misery.

Servant. Perhaps you have learned it without book: but, I pray,

Can you read anything you see?

Romeo. Ay, If I know the letters and the language.

Servant. Ye say honestly. rest you merry!

Romeo. Stay, fellow; I can read.


[Reads.]

		Signior Martino and his wife and daughters;
		County Anselmo and his beauteous sisters; the lady
		widow of Vitruvio; Signior Placentio and his lovely
		nieces; Mercutio and his brother Valentine; mine
		uncle Capulet, his wife, and daughters; my fair niece
		Rosaline; Livia; Signior Valentio and his cousin
		Tybalt; Lucio and the lively Helena.
		A fair assembly.


[Gives back the paper.]

		whither should they come?

Servant. Up.

Romeo. Whither?

Servant. To supper; to our house.

Romeo. Whose house?

Servant. My master's.

Romeo. Indeed I should have ask'd you that before.

		Servant. Now I'll tell you without asking.
		My master is the great rich Capulet;
		And if you be not of the house of Montagues,
		I pray, come and crush a cup of wine.
		Rest you merry!


[Exit.]

		Benvolio. At this same ancient feast of Capulet's
		Sups the fair Rosaline whom thou so lov'st;
		With all the admired beauties of Verona.
		Go thither; and, with unattainted eye,
		Compare her face with some that I shall show,
		And I will make thee think thy swan a crow.

		Romeo. When the devout religion of mine eye
		Maintains such falsehood, then turn tears to fires;
		And these,who, often drown'd, could never die.
		Transparent heretics, be burnt for liars!
		One fairer than my love! the all-seeing sun
		Ne'er saw her match since first the world begun.

		Benvolio. Tut, you saw her fair, none else being by,
		Herself pois'd with herself in either eye.
		But in that crystal scales let there be weigh'd
		Your lady's love against some other maid
		That I will show you shining at this feast,
		And she shall scant show well that now shows best.

Romeo. I'll go along, no such sight to be shown,

But to rejoice in splendour of my own.


[Exeunt.]




Scene III.



Room in Capulet's House.


[Enter Lady Capulet, and Nurse.]

Lady Capulet. Nurse, where's my daughter? Call her forth to me.

		Nurse. Now, by my maidenhea, at twelve year old,
		I bade her come. What, lamb! what ladybird!
		God forbid! Where's this girl? What, Juliet!


[Enter Juliet.]

Juliet. How now, who calls?

Nurse. Your mother.

Juliet. Madam, I am here.

What is your will?

		Lady Capulet.This is the matter:-Nurse, give leave awhile,
		We must talk in secret:-Nurse, come back again;
		I have remember'd me, thou's hear our counsel.
		Thou knowest my daughter's of a pretty age.

Nurse. Faith, I can tell her age unto an hour.

Lady Capulet. She's not fourteen.

		Nurse. I'll lay fourteen of my teeth,
		And yet, to my teen be it spoken, I have but four,
		She is not fourteen. How long is it now
		To Lammas-tide?

Lady Capulet. A fortnight and odd days.

		Nurse. Even or odd, of all days in the year,
		Come Lammas-eve at night shall she be fourteen.
		Susan and she, God rest all Christian souls!
		Were of an age. well, Susan is with God;
		She was too good for me. but, as I said,
		On Lammas-eve at night shall she be fourteen;
		That shall she, marry; I remember it well.
		'Tis since the earthquake now eleven years;
		And she was wean'd, I never shall forget it.
		Of all the days of the year, upon that day.
		For I had then laid wormwood to my dug,
		Sitting in the sun under the dove-house wall;
		My lord and you were then at Mantua.
		Nay, I do bear a brain. but, as I said,
		When it did taste the wormwood on the nipple
		Of my dug and felt it bitter, pretty fool,
		To see it tetchy, and fall out with the dug!
		Shake, quoth the dove-house. 'twas no need, I trow,
		To bid me trudge.
		And since that time it is eleven years;
		For then she could stand alone; nay, by the rood.
		She could have run and waddled all about;
		For even the day before, she broke her brow.
		And then my husband, God be with his soul!
		A was a merry man, took up the child.
		'Yea,' quoth he, 'dost thou fall upon thy face?
		Thou wilt fall backward when thou hast more wit;
		Wilt thou not, Jule?' and, by my holidame,
		The pretty wretch left crying, and said 'Ay.'
		To see now how a jest shall come about!
		I warrant, an I should live a thousand yeas,
		I never should forget it; 'Wilt thou not, Jule?' quoth he;
		And, pretty fool, it stinted, and said 'Ay.'

Lady Capulet. Enough of this; I pray thee hold thy peace.

		Nurse. Yes, madam: yet I cannot choose but laugh,
		To think it should leave crying, and say 'Ay.'
		And yet, I warrant, it had upon its brow
		A bump as big as a young cockerel's stone;
		A parlous knock; and it cried bitterly.
		'Yea,' quoth my husband, 'fall'st upon thy face?
		Thou wilt fall backward when thou com'st to age;
		Wilt thou not, Jule? it stinted, and said 'Ay.'

Juliet. And stint thou too, I pray thee, nurse, say I.

		Nurse. Peace, I have done. God mark thee to his grace!
		Thou wast the prettiest babe that e'er I nurs'd.
		An I might live to see thee married once, I have my wish.

Lady Capulet. Marry, that marry is the very theme I came to talk of.

Tell me, daughter Juliet, How stands your disposition to be married?

Juliet. It is an honour that I dream not of.

Nurse. An honour! were not I thine only nurse,

I would say thou hadst suck'd wisdom from thy teat.

		Lady Capulet.Well, think of marriage now; younger than you,
		Here in Verona, ladies of esteem,
		Are made already mothers: by my count
		I was your mother much upon these years
		That you are now a maid. Thus, then, in brief;
		The valiant Paris seeks you for his love.

Nurse. A man, young lady! lady, such a man

As all the world why he's a man of wax.

Lady Capulet.Verona's summer hath not such a flower.

Nurse. Nay, he's a flower, in faith, a very flower.

		Lady Capulet.What say you? can you love the gentleman?
		This night you shall behold him at our feast;
		Read o'er the volume of young Paris' face,
		And find delight writ there with beauty's pen;
		Examine every married lineament,
		And see how one another lends content;
		And what obscur'd in this fair volume lies
		Find written in the margent of his eyes.
		This precious book of love, this unbound lover,
		To beautify him, only lacks a cover.
		The fish lives in the sea; and 'tis much pride
		For fair without the fair within to hide.
		That book in many's eyes doth share the glory,
		That in gold clasps locks in the golden story;
		So shall you share all that he doth possess,
		By having him, making yourself no less.

Nurse. No less! nay, bigger; women grow by men

Lady Capulet. Speak briefly, can you like of Paris' love?

		Juliet. I'll look to like, if looking liking move.
		But no more deep will I endart mine eye
		Than your consent gives strength to make it fly.


[Enter a Servant.]

		Servant. Madam, the guests are come, supper served up, you
		Called, my young lady asked for, the nurse cursed in
		The pantry, and everything in extremity.
		I must hence to wait; I beseech you, follow straight.

Lady Capulet.We follow thee.


[Exit Servant.]

Servant. Juliet, the county stays.

Nurse. Go, girl, seek happy nights to happy days.


[Exeunt.]




Scene IV.



A Street.


[Enter Romeo, Mercutio, Benvolio, with five or six Maskers; Torch-bearers, and others.]

Romeo. What, shall this speech be spoke for our excuse?

Or shall we on without apology?

		Benvolio. The date is out of such prolixity.
		We'll have no Cupid hoodwink'd with a scarf,
		Bearing a Tartar's painted bow of lath,
		Scaring the ladies like a crow-keeper;
		Nor no without-book prologue, faintly spoke
		After the prompter, for our entrance.
		But, let them measure us by what they will,
		We'll measure them a measure, and be gone.

Romeo. Give me a torch, I am not for this ambling;

Being but heavy, I will bear the light.

Mercutio. Nay, gentle Romeo, we must have you dance.

		Romeo. Not I, believe me. you have dancing shoes,
		With nimble soles; I have a soul of lead
		So stakes me to the ground I cannot move.

Mercutio. You are a lover; borrow Cupid's wings,

And soar with them above a common bound.

		Romeo. I am too sore enpierced with his shaft
		To soar with his light feathers; and so bound,
		I cannot bound a pitch above dull woe.
		Under love's heavy burden do I sink.

Mercutio. And, to sink in it, should you burden love;

Too great oppression for a tender thing.

Romeo. Is love a tender thing? it is too rough,

Too rude, too boisterous; and it pricks like thorn.

		Mercutio. If love be rough with you, be rough with love;
		Prick love for pricking, and you beat love down.
		Give me a case to put my visage in. [Putting on a mask.] 
		A visard for a visard! what care I
		What curious eye doth quote deformities?
		Here are the beetle-brows shall blush for me.

Benvolio. Come, knock and enter; and no sooner in

But every man betake him to his legs.

		Romeo. A torch for me. let wantons, light of heart,
		Tickle the senseless rushes with their heels;
		For I am proverb'd with a grandsire phrase;
		I'll be a candle-holder and look on;
		The game was ne'er so fair, and I am done.

		Mercutio. Tut, dun's the mouse, the constable's own word.
		If thou art dun, we'll draw thee from the mire
		Of this sir-reverence love, wherein thou stick'st
		Up to the ears. Come, we burn daylight, ho.

Romeo. Nay, that's not so.

		Mercutio. I mean, sir, in delay
		We waste our lights in vain, like lamps by day.
		Take our good meaning, for our judgment sits
		Five times in that ere once in our five wits.

Romeo. And we mean well, in going to this mask;

But 'tis no wit to go.

Mercutio. Why, may one ask?

Romeo. I dreamt a dream to-night.

Mercutio. And so did I.

Romeo. Well, what was yours?

Mercutio. That dreamers often lie.

Romeo. In bed asleep, while they do dream things true.

		Mercutio. O, then, I see Queen Mab hath been with you.
		She is the fairies' midwife; and she comes
		In shape no bigger than an agate-stone
		On the fore-finger of an alderman,
		Drawn with a team of little atomies A
		thwart men's noses as they lie asleep.
		Her waggon-spokes made of long spinners' legs;
		The cover, of the wings of grasshoppers;
		The traces, of the smallest spider's web;
		The collars, of the moonshine's watery beams;
		Her whip, of cricket's bone; the lash, of film;
		Her waggoner, a small grey-coated gnat,
		Not half so big as a round little worm
		Prick'd from the lazy finger of a maid.
		Her chariot is an empty hazel-nut,
		Made by the joiner squirrel or old grub,
		Time out o' mind the fairies' coachmakers.
		And in this state she gallops night by night.
		Through lovers' brains, and then they dream of love;
		O'er courtiers' knees, that dream on court'sies straight;
		O'er lawyers' fingers, who straight dream on fees;
		O'er ladies' lips, who straight on kisses dream,
		Which oft the angry Mab with blisters plagues,
		Because their breaths with sweetmeats tainted are.
		Sometime she gallops o'er a courtier's nose,
		And then dreams he of smelling out a suit;
		And sometime comes she with a tithe-pig's tail,
		Tickling a parson's nose as a lies asleep,
		Then dreams he of another benefice.
		Sometime she driveth o'er a soldier's neck,
		And then dreams he of cutting foreign throats,
		Of breaches, ambuscadoes, Spanish blades,
		Of healths five fathom deep; and then anon
		Drums in his ear, at which he starts and wakes;
		And, being thus frighted, swears a prayer or two,
		And sleeps again. This is that very Mab
		That plats the manes of horses in the night;
		And bakes the elf-locks in foul sluttish hairs,
		Which, once untangled, much misfortune bodes.
		This is the hag, when maids lie on their backs,
		That presses them, and learns them first to bear,
		Making them women of good carriage.
		This is she.

Romeo. Peace, peace, Mercutio, peace,

Thou talk'st of nothing.

		Mercutio. True, I talk of dreams,
		Which are the children of an idle brain,
		Begot of nothing but vain fantasy;
		Which is as thin of substance as the air,
		And more inconstant than the wind, who wooes
		Even now the frozen bosom of the north,
		And, being anger'd, puffs away from thence,
		Turning his face to the dew-dropping south.

Benvolio. This wind you talk of blows us from ourselves.

Supper is done, and we shall come too late.

		Romeo. I fear, too early. for my mind misgives
		Some consequence, yet hanging in the stars,
		Shall bitterly begin his fearful date
		With this night's revels; and expire the term
		Of a despised life, clos'd in my breast,
		By some vile forfeit of untimely death.
		But He that hath the steerage of my course
		Direct my sail! On, lusty gentlemen!

Benvolio. Strike, drum.


[Exeunt.]




Scene V.



A Hall in Capulet's House.


[Musicians waiting. Enter Servants.]

Servant. Where's Potpan, that he helps not to take away?

He shift a trencher! He scrape a trencher!

Servant. When good manners shall lie all in one or two men's

Hands, and they unwash'd too, 'tis a foul thing.

		Servant. Away with the join-stools,
		Remove the court-cupboard, look to the plate.
		Good thou, save me a piece of marchpane; and as thou loves me,
		Let the porter let in Susan Grindstone and Nell.
		Antony! and Potpan!

Servant. Ay, boy, ready.

Servant. You are looked for and called for, asked for and sought for in the great chamber.

Servant. We cannot be here and there too.

Cheerly, boys; be brisk awhile, and the longer liver take all.


[They retire behind.]


[Enter Capulet, &c. with the Guests the Maskers.]

		Capulet.Welcome, gentlemen! ladies that have their toes
		Unplagu'd with corns will have a bout with you.
		Ah ha, my mistresses! which of you all
		Will now deny to dance? she that makes dainty,
		She, I'll swear hath corns; am I come near you now?
		Welcome, gentlemen! I have seen the day
		That I have worn a visard; and could tell
		A whispering tale in a fair lady's ear,
		Such as would please; 'tis gone, 'tis gone, 'tis gone.
		You are welcome, gentlemen! Come, musicians, play.
		A hall,a hall! give room! and foot it, girls.


[Music plays, and they dance.]

		More light, you knaves; and turn the tables up,
		And quench the fire, the room is grown too hot.
		Ah, sirrah, this unlook'd-for sport comes well.
		Nay, sit, nay, sit, good cousin Capulet;
		For you and I are past our dancing days;
		How long is't now since last yourself and I
		Were in a mask?

Second Capulet. By'r Lady, thirty years.

		Capulet.What, man! 'tis not so much, 'tis not so much.
		'Tis since the nuptial of Lucentio,
		Come Pentecost as quickly as it will,
		Some five-and-twenty years; and then we mask'd.

Second Capulet. 'Tis more, 'tis more. his son is elder, sir;

His son is thirty.

Capulet. Will you tell me that?

His son was but a ward two years ago.

		Romeo. What lady is that,
		Which doth enrich the hand
		Of yonder knight?

Servant. I know not, sir.

		Romeo. O, she doth teach the torches to burn bright!
		It seems she hangs upon the cheek of night
		Like a rich jewel in an Ethiop's ear;
		Beauty too rich for use, for earth too dear!
		So shows a snowy dove trooping with crows
		As yonder lady o'er her fellows shows.
		The measure done, I'll watch her place of stand
		And, touching hers, make blessed my rude hand.
		Did my heart love till now? forswear it, sight!
		For I ne'er saw true beauty till this night.

		Tybalt. This, by his voice, should be a Montague.
		Fetch me my rapier, boy. what, dares the slave
		Come hither, cover'd with an antic face,
		To fleer and scorn at our solemnity?
		Now, by the stock and honour of my kin,
		To strike him dead I hold it not a sin.

Capulet.Why, how now, kinsman! wherefore storm you so?

		Tybalt. Uncle, this is a Montague, our foe;
		A villain, that is hither come in spite,
		To scorn at our solemnity this night.

Capulet.Young Romeo, is it?

Tybalt. 'Tis he, that villain, Romeo.

		Capulet. Content thee, gentle coz, let him alone,
		He bears him like a portly gentleman;
		And, to say truth, Verona brags of him
		To be a virtuous and well-govern'd youth.
		I would not for the wealth of all the town.
		Here in my house do him disparagement.
		Therefore be patient, take no note of him,
		It is my will; the which if thou respect,
		Show a fair presence and put off these frowns,
		An ill-beseeming semblance for a feast.

Tybalt. It fits, when such a villain is a guest.

I'll not endure him.

		Capulet. He shall be endur'd.
		What, goodman boy! I say he shall go to?
		Am I the master here, or you? go to.
		You'll not endure him! God shall mend my soul,
		You'll make a mutiny among my guests!
		You will set cock-a-hoop! you'll be the man!

Tybalt. Why, uncle, 'tis a shame.

		Capulet. Go to, go to!
		You are a saucy boy. Is't so, indeed?
		This trick may chance to scathe you, I know what.
		You must contrary me! marry, 'tis time.
		Well said, my hearts! You are a princox; go.
		Be quiet, or..More light, more light! For shame!
		I'll make you quiet. What! cheerly, my hearts.

		Tybalt. Patience perforce with wilful choler meeting
		Makes my flesh tremble in their different greeting.
		I will withdraw, but this intrusion shall,
		Now seeming sweet, convert to bitter gall.


[Exit.]

		Romeo.[To Juliet.] If I profane with my unworthiest hand
		This holy shrine, the gentle fine is this.
		My lips, two blushing pilgrims, ready stand
		To smooth that rough touch with a tender kiss.

		Juliet.Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much,
		Which mannerly devotion shows in this;
		For saints have hands that pilgrims' hands do touch,
		And palm to palm is holy palmers' kiss.

Romeo. Have not saints lips, and holy palmers too?

Juliet. Ay, pilgrim, lips that they must use in prayer.

Romeo. O, then, dear saint, let lips do what hands do;

They pray, grant thou, lest faith turn to despair.

Juliet. Saints do not move, though grant for prayers' sake.

Romeo.Then move not while my prayer's effect I take.

Thus from my lips, by thine my sin is purg'd. [Kissing her.]

Juliet.Then have my lips the sin that they have took.

Romeo. Sin from my lips? O trespass sweetly urg'd!

Give me my sin again.

Juliet.You kiss by the book.

Nurse. Madam, your mother craves a word with you.

Romeo. What is her mother?

		Nurse. Marry, bachelor,
		Her mother is the lady of the house.
		And a good lady, and a wise and virtuous.
		I nurs'd her daughter that you talk'd withal;
		I tell you, he that can lay hold of her.
		Shall have the chinks.

Romeo. Is she a Capulet?

O dear account! my life is my foe's debt.

Benvolio. Away, be gone; the sport is at the best.

Romeo. Ay, so I fear; the more is my unrest.

		Capulet. Nay, gentlemen, prepare not to be gone;
		We have a trifling foolish banquet towards..
		Is it e'en so? why then, I thank you all;
		I thank you, honest gentlemen, good-night.
		More torches here! Come on then, let's to bed.
		Ah, sirrah [to Second Capulet], by my fay, it waxes late;
		I'll to my rest.


[Exeunt all but Juliet and Nurse.]

Juliet. Come hither, Nurse. What is yond gentleman?

Nurse. The son and heir of old Tiberio.

Juliet. What's he that now is going out of door?

Nurse. Marry, that, I think, be young Petruchio.

Juliet.What's he that follows there, that would not dance?

Nurse. I know not.

Juliet. Go ask his name. if he be married,

My grave is like to be my wedding-bed.

Nurse. His name is Romeo, and a Montague;

The only son of your great enemy.

		Juliet. My only love sprung from my only hate!
		Too early seen unknown, and known too late!
		Prodigious birth of love it is to me,
		That I must love a loathed enemy.

Nurse. What's this? What's this?

Juliet. A rhyme I learn'd even now

Of one I danc'd withal. [One calls within, 'Juliet.']

Nurse. Anon, anon! Come, let's away; the strangers all are gone.


[Exeunt.]




ACT II.





THE PROLOGUE



[Enter Chorus.]

		Chorus. Now old desire doth in his deathbed lie,
		And young affection gapes to be his heir;
		That fair for which love groan'd for, and would die,
		With tender Juliet match'd, is now not fair.
		Now Romeo is belov'd, and loves again.
		Alike bewitched by the charm of looks;
		But to his foe suppos'd he must complain,
		And she steal love's sweet bait from fearful hooks.
		Being held a foe, he may not have access
		To breathe such vows as lovers us'd to swear;
		And she as much in love, her means much less
		To meet her new beloved anywhere.
		But passion lends them power, time means, to meet,
		Tempering extremities with extreme sweet.


[Exit.]




Scene I.



An open place adjoining Capulet's Garden.


[Enter Romeo.]

Romeo. Can I go forward when my heart is here?

Turn back, dull earth, and find thy centre out.

[He climbs the wall and leaps down within it.]


[Enter Benvolio and Mercutio.]

Benvolio. Romeo! my cousin Romeo!

Mercutio. He is wise;

And, on my life, hath stol'n him home to bed.

Benvolio. He ran this way, and leap'd this orchard wall.

Call, good Mercutio.

		Mercutio. Nay, I'll conjure too.
		Romeo! humours! madman! passion! lover!
		Appear thou in the likeness of a sigh.
		Speak but one rhyme, and I am satisfied;
		Cry but 'Ah me!' pronounce but Love and dove;
		Speak to my gossip Venus one fair word,
		One nickname for her purblind son and heir,
		Young auburn Cupid, he that shot so trim
		When King Cophetua lov'd the beggar-maid!
		He heareth not, he stirreth not, he moveth not.
		The ape is dead, and I must conjure him.
		I conjure thee by Rosaline's bright eyes,
		By her high forehead and her scarlet lip,
		By her fine foot, straight leg, and quivering thigh,
		And the demesnes that there adjacent lie,
		That in thy likeness thou appear to us!

Benvolio. An if he hear thee, thou wilt anger him.

		Mercutio. This cannot anger him 'twould anger him
		To raise a spirit in his mistress' circle,
		Of some strange nature, letting it there stand


